Course Project
==============
## author: rumpole82

###An R script called run_analysis.R was created to analyse data from the following data set:

https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

This data was obtained from:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

and generated by:

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto.
Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory
DITEN - Universit? degli Studi di Genova.
Via Opera Pia 11A, I-16145, Genoa, Italy.
activityrecognition@smartlab.ws
www.smartlab.ws

The experimental design is described by them as follows:

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

###The objectives of the run_analysis.R program are as follows:
1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

### I used R commands, as well the dplyr and tidyr packages, to write the program as outlined below: 

###1. I used cbind() and rbind() to create one big data set from the train and test data sets, after reading the data into R using read.table() and assigning appropriate column names to the data using the names() function and the concatenate function c().

###2. I used pattern matching and replacement and subsetting functions (grep, [ ) to extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.

###3. I used subsetting and unlist() to name the activities in the data set.

###4. I used the colnames() function to appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names.

###5. I used gather(), group_by(), summarize(), and %>% to create the second tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

###Lastly, I used the write.table() function to write the tidydata.txt output file for my repo.




